---
title: "I was Never Asking to be Welcomed"
date: 2020-02-01-T12:00:00-00:00
excerpt_separator: "<!--more-->"
categories:
  - politics
tags:
  - brexit
---

I should have seen Brexit coming the day I moved to the UK.  It was August 2007, and I standing in the immigration lineup at Heathrow Airport, waiting to be called forward and present my Austrian passport.

"What's your reason for coming to the UK today?" asked the border guard.

"I'm moving here. I'll be living here from now on."

"And where's your visa?" he asked, flipping through my passport.

"I don't need one." He shot me a suspicious look. After an awkward silence he told me to wait while he took my passport away to go discuss the matter with a colleague. 

He returned a few minutes later, shoved my passport my way, and waved me through in a huff. I had just exercised my rights as an EU Citizen, and it was clear that he was unhappy about what had transpired.

<!--more-->

Over the subsequent 12 years, my partner and I established our careers, made great friends, had two kids, and bought a flat in London. It was a fantastically exciting, life changing, career-making time, one that we will never forget.

There won't be any more of those years. We left in August 2019, moved back to continental Europe.

We knew we would be leaving the day after the vote. We didn't know where we would end up, but we knew we had to get out.

When I would announce our intention to British friends or colleagues, they would often reply with a well-meaning _"but you will always be welcome here!"_ Unfortunately, it was never about that.

---

I was never asking to be welcomed. Not when I showed up at the airport announcing that I was moving in, not when I took on employment, and certainly not when I got permanent residency for my non-EU partner. I was always just exercising my rights. Brexit took those rights out from under me.

I recently had a pro-Brexit man tell me that I could have taken on UK citizenship after 5 years, and the fact that I didn't do so proves that I "was not loyal to the country in the first place."  My response was that loyalty has nothing to do with it. My ability to freely live and work in the UK was not a privelige generously gifted to me by the people of Great Britain (as was implied), it was a _right_ that I had under the treaties of the European Union. Wether or not I was "loyal" or people felt "welcoming" toward me was irelevant.

The sentiments displayed by said Brexiter were, I think, fairly emlematic of the UK's relationship with Europe. There seem to be in the UK a large number of people who believe that Britain is so exceptional that everyone who immigrates is only doing so to take advantage of the embarassment of riches the country has to offer. To those people, the fact that it was my legal right to move in and take up work was seen as a threat to their way of life. I had come in under terms that they did not control, which mean there was a (perceived) risk that I might act in a way to undermine everything the country had.

On the remain side, people did not have a counternarrative, because to acknowledge the truth - that millions of EU Citizens _should_ have the right to live and work in the UK, because that is how Europe works - would have enflamed far too many voters. Had this sort of talk been deployed, it's possible the referendum would have been lost by a much larger margin.

So instead, people said "you are still welcome here".

---

I am now of the opinion that Brexit was inevitable. Sad, yes. Very. But also impossible to avoid. 

I don't think the majority of Britain ever really wanted to be in. Not properly, not really. The EU bent over backward to allow for things like the membership rebate because of this fact. 

It's the break-up of a bad relationship. Yes, Britain and Europe really did have some wonderful times together, but I think in a few years we will all agree that there was no other way but out, in the end.

---

_Final side note: I am proud of the friends and colleagues I made in London and the rest of the UK, and I miss many of them like crazy. If any of y'all are reading this, I hope my opinions don't upset you too much :)_
